Title: An Opinionated tox.ini File
Subheading: Automate all of your Python project's tasks with a succinct tox.ini file.
Tags: tox, Hypothesis
Alias: /post/tox/

This post assumes some knowledge of tox. For a beginner's introduction see
[my tox tutorial.](/2018/09/01/tox-tutorial/)

Below is an excerpted version of the [tox.ini file from hypothesis/h as of November
2018](https://github.com/hypothesis/h/blob/471cf3e620cb0ff1a6ec8ccca710727b1e20e0e6/tox.ini)
(yes we're still using Python 2). It demonstrates a particular way of using tox
in which all of the tox commands are of the form `tox -e pyXY-<task>`. That
is: use a particular version of Python (the `pyXY` part) to run a particular
development task (the `<task>`) part:

* `tox -e py27-dev` runs the app in the development server.  
  `tox -e py36-dev` runs the app in the development server using Python 3.
* `tox -e py27-tests` or `tox -e py36-tests` runs the tests in Python 2 or 3.
* `tox -e py36-lint` runs the linter and prints out any warnings.
* `tox -e py36-docs` builds the docs and serves them locally with live reloading.
* `tox -e py36-coverage` prints the coverage report.
* Not shown below, but `tox -e py36-format` formats the code using Black.
* Other tasks, such as deploying a new release, could be added too.

We see tox as a general, virtualenv-based development task automation tool, and
don't just use it for running tests. We use tox to standardise and automate any
development task that benefits from being run in its own isolated venv.

Using tox's factors and conditionals (see below) you can implement this
`pyXY-<task>` approach in a simple and concise `tox.ini`, without duplication or
boilerplate:

```ini
[tox]
envlist = py27-tests
skipsdist = true
# Enable the venv_update extension so that changes to requirements files are
# automatically detected.
requires = tox-pip-extensions
tox_pip_extensions_ext_venv_update = true

[testenv]
skip_install = true
passenv =
  dev: AUTHORITY
  dev: BOUNCER_URL
  dev: CLIENT_OAUTH_ID
  …
  {tests,functests}: TEST_DATABASE_URL
  {tests,functests}: ELASTICSEARCH_URL
  …
  functests: BROKER_URL
  codecov: CI TRAVIS*
deps =
  tests: coverage
  {tests,functests}: pytest
  {tests,functests}: factory-boy
  tests: mock
  tests: hypothesis
  lint: flake8
  lint: flake8-future-import
  coverage: coverage
  codecov: codecov
  functests: webtest
  docs: sphinx-autobuild
  docs: sphinx
  docs: sphinx_rtd_theme
  {tests,functests}: -r requirements.txt
  dev: ipython
  dev: ipdb
  dev: -r requirements-dev.in
whitelist_externals =
  dev: sh
changedir =
  docs: docs
commands =
  dev: sh bin/hypothesis --dev init
  dev: {posargs:sh bin/hypothesis devserver}
  lint: flake8 h
  lint: flake8 tests
  tests: coverage run …
  functests: pytest -Werror {posargs:tests/functional/}
  docs: sphinx-autobuild …
  coverage: -coverage combine
  coverage: coverage report
  codecov: codecov
```

## How it Works

The `tox.ini` file is written entirely using [tox's factors and conditionals](https://tox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#generating-environments-conditional-settings),
and doesn't use any of the separate `[testenv:NAME]` file sections that you
see in most `tox.ini` files. When you pass an envlist to tox like `tox -e py36-tests` you're telling tox to run a single testenv, named `py36-tests`, but
the testenv name contains two **factors** `py36` and `tox`.

**Builtin factors:** The `py36` factor is a tox builtin factor that sets the
Python version to 3.6.  tox comes with builtin factors for all the Python
versions: `py27`, `py37`, etc. You'll notice that we don't define the `pyXY`'s
anywhere in our `tox.ini` file. They're builtin, so we can just go ahead and
use them with `-e` on the command line.

**Custom factors:** The `tests` part in `-e py36-tests` is a custom factor,
defined by us in our `tox.ini` file. Some of the lines in our `tox.ini` use
`tests:` as a conditional, meaning those lines should only be applied if
`tests` is in the testenv name. For example the `coverage` and `mock`
dependencies will only be installed if `tests` is involved (for example when
running `tox -e py27-tests` or `tox -e py36-tests`), whereas `flake8` will only
be installed if `lint` is in the `tox -e` command:

<pre><code>deps =
<strong>tests:</strong> coverage
<strong>tests:</strong> mock
<strong>lint:</strong> flake8
…</code></pre>

By using `tests:` and `lint:` as conditionals in the `tox.ini` file we
implicitly define `tests` and `lint` factors in addition to the builtin `pyXY`
factors, and can use them in commands like `tox -e py36-lint`.

What tox does when you give it a command like `tox -e py36-tests` is:

1. First, it invokes the builtin `py36` factor, which sets the version of
   Python to be used to 3.6.
2. Second, it parses the `tox.ini` file looking for lines that match any factor
   in the given testenv name `py36-tests`:
    1. Any line that doesn't begin with a `factor:` prefix is unconditional,
       and is always applied whenever tox runs.
    2. Any line that begins with `tests:` matches the `tests` conditional, so
       it's applied. Any `tests:` dependencies will be installed, any `tests:`
       commands will be run, and so on.
    3. A line like `{tests,functests}: pytest` matches _either_ `tests` or
       `functests`, so the `pytest` dependency will be installed for `tox -e py36-tests` too. More [complex conditionals](https://tox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#complex-factor-conditions) are possible too.
3. After collecting all the matching lines tox runs the testenv:
    1. Any matched environment variables are passed through to the test
       environment
    2. Matched dependencies are installed in the order that they were given in
       the `tox.ini` file
    3. Matched commands are run in file order

Here's a view of the `tox.ini` file with the lines that apply when `tox -e py36-tests` is run highlighted. The non-highlighted lines are ignored:

<pre><code>[tox]
<strong>envlist = py27-tests
skipsdist = true
requires = tox-pip-extensions
tox_pip_extensions_ext_venv_update = true</strong>

[testenv]
<strong>skip_install = true</strong>
passenv =
dev: AUTHORITY
dev: BOUNCER_URL
dev: CLIENT_OAUTH_ID
…
<strong>{tests,functests}: TEST_DATABASE_URL</strong>
<strong>{tests,functests}: ELASTICSEARCH_URL</strong>
…
functests: BROKER_URL
codecov: CI TRAVIS*
deps =
<strong>tests: coverage</strong>
<strong>{tests,functests}: pytest</strong>
<strong>{tests,functests}: factory-boy</strong>
<strong>tests: mock</strong>
<strong>tests: hypothesis</strong>
lint: flake8
lint: flake8-future-import
coverage: coverage
codecov: codecov
functests: webtest
docs: sphinx-autobuild
docs: sphinx
docs: sphinx_rtd_theme
<strong>{tests,functests}: -r requirements.txt</strong>
dev: ipython
dev: ipdb
dev: -r requirements-dev.in
whitelist_externals =
dev: sh
changedir =
docs: docs
commands =
dev: sh bin/hypothesis --dev init
dev: {posargs:sh bin/hypothesis devserver}
lint: flake8 h
lint: flake8 tests
<strong>tests: coverage run …</strong>
functests: pytest -Werror {posargs:tests/functional/}
docs: sphinx-autobuild …
coverage: -coverage combine
coverage: coverage report
codecov: codecov</code></pre>

## Benefits

Automating our development tasks like this has a bunch of advantages:

* It simplifies things for developers, especially new developers.
  You don't need to learn about virtualenv and create and activate a
  development virtualenv and install dependencies. You don't need virtualenv
  management tools like virtualenvwrapper. You just run `tox`.
* Tasks for running the tests, linting, releasing, etc can be defined in one
  place in `tox.ini` and run exactly the same everywhere: on any developer's
  machine or on CI.
* tox isolates every task using a Python virtualenv, `PATH` isolation and
  environment variable isolation, so problems caused by differences between
  environments are minimised.
* Because tox uses a different virtualenv for each task (it creates one
  virtualenv for the dev server, another for the tests, another for building
  the docs, and so on) the chances of conflicts between dependencies are
  reduced. You don't need your documentation tools installed in your devserver
  environment.
* When Python 3.8 comes out and it's time to test your app in it, you can
  easily run the dev server with `tox -e py38-dev` or the tests with `tox -e py38-tests`, without having to modify `tox.ini` first.

tox isn't just for tests! Consider using it to standardise all of your
project's development tasks. For details of all the
tox concepts used here and more see
[my tox tutorial](/2018/09/01/tox-tutorial/).
