Title: Todo.txt

[Todo.txt](http://todotxt.org/) is a bash script for managing a todo list in a plain text `todo.txt` file:

```console
$ todo.sh add Go grocery shopping
1 Go grocery shopping
TODO: 1 added.
$ todo.sh add Feed the cat
2 Feed the cat
TODO: 2 added.
$ todo.sh add Feed the dog
3 Feed the dog
TODO: 3 added.
$ todo.sh ls
1 Go grocery shopping
2 Feed the cat
3 Feed the dog
--
TODO: 3 of 3 tasks shown
```

I find that I can never make the habit of using any other todo app stick, but todo.txt works because it puts my todo list right at my fingertips very immediately whether I'm in a shell or in vim (since you can just open the `todo.txt` file and edit it directly).

If you put the `todo.txt` file in Dropbox then you also get continuous cloud backup and syncing between devices and you can read and edit the file on your phone. I don't use any particular todo.txt app on my phone, I just use the Dropbox app's built-in ability to view and edit plain text files.

Todo.txt doesn't give you much that you wouldn't get by just having a `todo.txt` file that you open in a text editor. It just provides a simple file format to follow and a `todo.sh` script with some convenient commands for working with the `todo.txt` file. There are actually desktop and mobile todo.txt apps but I don't use any of those.

There's no due dates or scheduled or recurring reminders, at least not without add-ons. I use the Reminders app on my phone for a lot of life-admin reminders and use that app's scheduled and recurring reminders. I use todo.txt for keeping track of my while-at-the-computer work tasks, and I don't need scheduled or recurring reminders for that.

This post is my quick-start guide to installing, configuring and using todo.txt.

Installation
------------

You can install todo.txt with [Homebrew](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/todo-txt), [apt](https://packages.ubuntu.com/jammy/todotxt-cli), [pacman](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/todotxt) or [make](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli#linux), but it's just a [single-file bash script](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/blob/master/todo.sh) so the easiest way to install todo.txt is just to download a tarball of the [latest release](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/releases) and extract the `todo.sh` and `todo.cfg` files into a directory.

I place both files in a `TODO.txt` folder in my [Dropbox](https://www.dropbox.com/) folder	and add that `TODO.txt` dir to my shell's `PATH` (for [fish](https://fishshell.com/) just add `fish_add_path ~/Dropbox/TODO.txt` to your `config.fish` file). This way todo.txt gets automatically "installed" on any computer that I have Dropbox installed on. Just make sure the `todo.sh` script is marked as executable: `chmod u+x ~/Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.sh`.

The downside of this approach is you won't automatically get upgraded if they release a new version. But new versions of todo.txt are rarely released, and you can subscribe to their [GitHub releases feed](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/releases.atom) and manually update your `todo.sh` file if they do release one.

Configuration
-------------

The `todo.cfg` file that you placed in your `Dropbox/TODO.txt` folder is todo.txt's config file. According to `todo.sh help` this file is supposed to be located at `~/.todo/config` but `todo.sh` actually looks for the config file in [a number of locations](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/blob/ea32af34e6a0efef59bdf9acaa1c38d5d32bef0d/todo.sh#L693-L700) including a `todo.cfg` file in the same directory as the `todo.sh` script, so placing `todo.cfg` alongside `todo.sh` in `Dropbox/TODO.txt` works.

[The default config file](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/blob/master/todo.cfg) documents many of the settings that you can use in `todo.cfg` and there's also [some more listed in `todo.sh`](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/blob/ea32af34e6a0efef59bdf9acaa1c38d5d32bef0d/todo.sh#L141-L156).

Here are the settings that I use:

```bash
export TODO_DIR=$(dirname "$0")

export TODO_FILE="$TODO_DIR/todo.txt"
export DONE_FILE="$TODO_DIR/done.txt"
export REPORT_FILE="$TODO_DIR/report.txt"
export TODO_ACTIONS_DIR="$TODO_DIR/actions"

export TODOTXT_AUTO_ARCHIVE=0
export TODOTXT_DEFAULT_ACTION=ls
export TODOTXT_PRESERVE_LINE_NUMBERS=1
export TODOTXT_SORT_COMMAND='sort'
```

The `export TODO_DIR=$(dirname "$0")`, which comes from the default `todo.cfg` file, sets `$TODO_DIR` to the directory containing the `todo.sh` script, i.e. the `Dropbox/TODO.txt` folder. So the four lines that follow configure `todo.sh` to look for its `todo.txt` file, `done.txt` file, `report.txt` file and `actions` folder all in the `Dropbox/TODO.txt` folder.

`export TODOTXT_SORT_COMMAND='sort'` makes `todo.sh` print out todo list items in the same line order as they appear in the `todo.txt` file. By default it seems to print them rearranged into alphabetical order which I thought was a bit odd, especially because I like to manually arrange the tasks in the file into the order that I intend to do them in.

`export TODOTXT_DEFAULT_ACTION=ls` means that just running `todo.sh` with no action will list all tasks instead of printing the help.

`export TODOTXT_AUTO_ARCHIVE=0` and `export TODOTXT_PRESERVE_LINE_NUMBERS=1` prevent the `todo.sh do` and `todo.sh rm` commands from changing the line numbers of the remaining uncompleted tasks, which can be confusing and lead to mistakes.

Usage
-----

### Adding tasks

Use `todo.sh add <task>` to add a task to your todo list:

```console
$ todo.sh add Go grocery shopping
1 Go grocery shopping
TODO: 1 added.
```

This can also be shortened to `todo.sh a <task>`:

```console
$ todo.sh a Take out the trash
2 Take out the trash
TODO: 2 added
```

There's also an `addm` command for adding multiple tasks at once. You have to start and end the multiline argument with quotes:

```console
$ todo.sh addm "Go grocery shopping
       Take out the trash
       Feed the dog"
3 Go grocery shopping
TODO: 3 added.
4 Take out the trash
TODO: 4 added.
5 Feed the dog
TODO: 5 added.
```

You can use `-t` to prepend the creation date to a task when adding it:

```console
$ todo.sh -t add Feed the dog
4 2022-11-04 Feed the dog
TODO: 4 added.
```

Or put `export TODOTXT_DATE_ON_ADD=1` in your `todo.cfg` to have it always prepend the date when adding tasks.

### Listing tasks

Use `todo.sh list` or `ls` to print out your todo list:

```console
$ todo.sh ls
1 Go grocery shopping
2 Take out the trash
--
TODO: 2 of 2 tasks shown
```

The `ls` command takes an optional list of filter terms that can be used to filter which tasks are printed:

```console
$ todo.sh ls grocery
1 Go grocery shopping
--
TODO: 1 of 2 tasks shown
```

If multiple filter terms are given then only tasks that match *all* the terms are printed. You can print tasks that contain *either* `TERM1` or `TERM2` with `ls TERM1\\|TERM2`. You can print tasks that *don't* contain `TERM` with `ls -TERM`.

### The `todo.txt` file

The todo list is stored in a plain text file that you can can read or edit in any text editor. The location of the file is determined by the `TODO_FILE` setting in `todo.cfg`. The file format is simply one task per line:

```console
$ cat ~/Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.txt
Go grocery shopping
Take out the trash
```

Completed tasks are lines that begin with `x `. Task lines can also contain optional priorities, completed dates, creation dates, projects, contexts, and key:value tags. The rest of this post explains what all these features are and how to use them. Here's an example task line from [the TODO.txt docs](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt/blob/master/README.md) showing all the features:

    x (A) 2016-05-20 2016-04-30 measure space for +chapelShelving @chapel due:2016-05-30

From left to right:

1. An optional leading `x ` marks a task as completed.
2. If a task is not completed then it may optionally start with a parenthesised capital letter to assign a priority to a task from `(A)` (highest) to `(Z)` (lowest). Completed tasks can't have priorities, the `t do` command removes any priority from the task's line.
3. For completed tasks, after the leading `x ` a date in `YYYY-MM-DD` format specifies the task's completion date.
4. For uncompleted tasks, after any optional priority a date in `YYYY-MM-DD` format specifies the task's _creation_ date. A completed task can have both a completed date and a creation date by having two dates one after another (completed date first).
5. One or more project tags like `+chapelShelving` can appear anywhere in the task's description.
6. One or more context tags like `@chapel` can appear anywhere in the task's description.
5. One or more key:value tags like `due:2016-05-30` can appear anywhere in the task's description. `todo.sh` doesn't do anything special with key:value tags but custom actions can use them to add new features.

See [todo.txt's docs](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt/blob/master/README.md) for full documentation of the file format.

### Completing and archiving tasks, and the `done.txt` file

Use `todo.sh done` or `do` to mark a task as done, using the line number to identify the task to mark:

```console
$ todo.sh do 2
2 x 2022-11-04 Take out the trash
TODO: 2 marked as done
```

You can give multiple space-separated numbers to complete multiple tasks at once. As well as marking the task as completed by prepending a leading `x `, `do` will also remove any priority and insert the completion date.

By default completing a task also archives it: moves the task from `todo.txt` into `done.txt`, which means it'll no longer show up in the output of `ls`. I don't like auto-archiving because it can change the line numbers of the remaining tasks. This can be confusing because line numbers shown in any previous `ls` output in your terminal session may no longer be correct. For example if you type another `todo.sh do <NUMBER>` command based on a line number that you can still see in the output from a previous `ls` command then you might complete the wrong task. You can disable auto-archiving with with the `-a` argument: `todo.sh -a do <NUMBER>`, or with `export TODOTXT_AUTO_ARCHIVE=0` in your `todo.cfg` file.

With auto-archiving disabled completed tasks will still be in `todo.txt` but just marked as done. They'll still show in the output of `todo.sh ls`:

```console
$ todo.sh
1 Go grocery shopping
2 x 2022-11-04 Take out the trash
--
TODO: 2 of 2 tasks shown
```

To get rid of them you can use the `todo.sh archive` command, which moves completed tasks from `todo.txt` into `done.txt` (and does change the line numbers of the remaining tasks in `todo.txt`):

```console
$ todo.sh archive
x 2022-11-04 Take out the trash
TODO: /Users/seanh/Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.txt archived.
$ todo.sh ls
1 Go grocery shopping
--
TODO: 1 of 1 tasks shown
```	

The `todo.sh listall` or `lsa` command list all tasks from both `todo.txt` and `done.txt`. `lsa` takes the same filter term arguments as `ls` does.

`todo.sh listfile done.txt` or `lf done.txt` will list only the tasks from your `done.txt` file and again accepts filter term arguments.

### Deleting tasks

Instead of marking an item as done you can delete it with `todo.sh del` or `rm`. This will simply delete the line from your `todo.txt` file:

```console
$ todo.sh rm 2
Delete 'Feed the cat'?  (y/n)
y
2 Feed the cat
TODO: 2 deleted.
```

By default `rm` leaves a blank line where the deleted line was, so that the line numbers of the remaining lines don't change. A subsequent `todo.sh archive` will delete any blank lines from `todo.txt` as well as moving any done tasks into `done.txt`. If you don't want a blank line to be left behind you can pass the `-n` argument to `todo.sh -n rm <line_number>` or put `export TODOTXT_PRESERVE_LINE_NUMBERS=0` in your `todo.cfg`.

### Editing tasks

The easiest way to edit existing lines in your `todo.txt` file is just to open it in a text editor. But `todo.sh` does provide some commands for editing tasks:

* `todo.sh rm <line_number> <term>` removes all instances of `<term>` from the task on the given line number
* `todo.sh prepend <line_number> <text_to_append>` prepends text to the front of a task
* `todo.sh append <line_number> <text_to_append>` appends text to the end of a task
* `todo.sh replace <line_number> <new_task>` completely replaces the task on the given line number with the new text

### Priorities

You can assign a priority to a task with `pri` or just `p`. A priority is just a parenthesised capital letter at the beginning of the line, from `A` (highest) to `Z` (lowest):

```console
$ todo.sh pri 3 A
3 (A) Feed the dog
TODO: 3 prioritized (A).
```

`ls` prints prioritised items in colour and bold. To change the priority of an item just run `pri` again with a different priority. To remove the priority from an item run `depri` or `dp`:

```console
$ todo.sh depri 3
3 Feed the dog
TODO: 3 deprioritized.
```

`listpri` or `lsp` lists all prioritised tasks only. Or `lsp A` to list only priority `A` tasks, `lsp A-C` to list priority `A`, `B` or `C` tasks. `lsp` can also take the same term arguments as `ls` does to further filter the tasks.

### Projects and contexts

You can add one or more projects (e.g. `+garage_cleaning`) and contexts (the place and situation where you'll work on a task, e.g, `@home`) to a task by just using `+<project>` or `@<context>` anywhere in the task:

```console
$ todo.sh add Put away tools +garage_cleaning @home
```

`ls` can filter on projects and contexts like any other term, for example: `ls +garage_cleaning` or `ls @home`. Or use `-+garage_cleaning` or `-@home` to list only tasks that _don't_ have a project or context.

`listproj` or `lsprj` lists all the projects in `todo.txt` (not to be confused with `lsp` which lists prioritised tasks). `listcon` or `lsc` lists all contexts.

### Multiple todo files

You can have multiple todo files in your `TODO.txt` folder and use `addto` to add tasks to a file other than `todo.txt`, for example a `somedaymaybe.txt` file. You have to create the file yourself first, `todo.sh` won't create the file for you (`touch Dropbox/TODO.txt/somedaymaybe.txt`). Then:

```console
$ todo.sh addto somedaymaybe.txt Water the plants
1 Water the plants
SOMEDAYMAYBE: 1 added.
```

To list the contents of a file other than `todo.txt` use `listfile` or `lf`:

```console
$ todo.sh lf somedaymaybe.txt
1 Water the plants
--
SOMEDAYMAYBE: 1 of 1 tasks shown
```

If you run `lf` with no arguments it'll list the available files for you.

You can move items between files with `move` or `mv`:

```console
$ todo.sh mv 2 somedaymaybe.txt
Move 'Feed the dog' from Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.txt to Dropbox/TODO.txt/somedaymaybe.txt? (y/n)
y
2 Feed the dog
TODO: 2 moved from 'Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.txt' to 'Dropbox/TODO.txt/somedaymaybe.txt'.
```

Or pass two filename arguments to `mv` to move a task from another file back into `todo.txt` (or to move a task between two arbitrary files):

```console
$ todo.sh mv 2 todo.txt somedaymaybe.txt
Move 'Feed the dog' from Dropbox/TODO.txt/somedaymaybe.txt to Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.txt? (y/n)
y
2 Feed the dog
TODO: 2 moved from 'Dropbox/TODO.txt/somedaymaybe.txt' to 'Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.txt'.
```

Confusingly **the destination file comes first**: `todo.sh mv 2 todo.txt somedaymaybe.txt` moves line 2 from `somedaymaybe.txt` into `todo.txt` not the other way round.

As far as I can tell commands like `do`, `rm`, `append`, `prepend`, `replace`, `archive`, `pri`, `depri` and others only work with `todo.txt`. There seems to be no way to operate on other files. I think you're supposed to use `lf` to list the contents of files and then `mv` to move tasks into `todo.txt` before operating on them. Or edit the files directly in a text editor.

Custom actions
--------------

`todo.sh` add-ons can add new commands or override existing commands. Add-ons are just executable files in the `TODO_ACTIONS_DIR` set in your `todo.cfg`, written in any language. To install an add-on you just download the script file into your `$TODO_ACTIONS_DIR` and mark it executable. Then if you run `todo.sh foo` it'll execute the script at `$TODO_ACTIONS_DIR/foo`, passing any command line args to the script.

See [Creating and Installing Add ons](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/wiki/Creating-and-Installing-Add-ons) in the `todo.sh` wiki for how to install add-ons or create your own, and the [Todo.sh Add on Directory](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/wiki/Todo.sh-Add-on-Directory) for a list of add-ons to download.

A few add-ons that I like are:

* [due](https://github.com/rebecca-owen/due): uses `due:YYYY-MM-DD` tags to list tasks that are due today or are overdue.

* [edit](https://github.com/todotxt/todo.txt-cli/wiki/Todo.sh-Add-on-Directory#edit-open-in-text-editor): adds a `todo.sh edit` command that opens your `todo.txt` file in your `$EDITOR`. Or `todo.sh edit <filename_without_extension>` to open another file, e.g. `todo.sh edit done`.

* [note](https://github.com/mgarrido/todo.txt-cli/tree/note/todo.actions.d): uses key:value tags to let you associate multi-line notes (stored in separate text files) with tasks.

  Notes are stored in a `notes` subdir in the same directory as your `todo.txt` files, one note file per task. The note files have short, randomly generated IDs for filenames and when you attach a note to a task a `note:<filename>.txt` tag is appended to the task's `todo.txt` line to record which note belongs to the task.

  It's a good idea but the implementation seems poor: it has to override the built-in `archive`, `del` and `rm` commands which could clash with any other plugin that overrides those commands. And it makes you use separate `note add` and `note edit` commands instead of a single command that adds a note to a task or edits the task's existing note.

  `todo.sh add <n>` adds a note to task `n` and opens your `$EDITOR` to let you write the note. `todo.sh edit <n>` edits task `n`'s note in your `$EDITOR`. `todo.sh note show <n>` prints out task `n`'s note.

Fish shell integration
----------------------

You'll want to add `fish_add_path ~/Dropbox/TODO.txt` to your `config.fish` file so that you can run the `todo.sh` command directly without having to type out the full path every time.

In addition I also add a couple of other todo.txt integrations into my fish config:

1. I "abbreviate" `todo.sh` as `t` so I can just type <kbd>t</kbd> <kbd>Enter</kbd> to print my todo list (since I also have `export TODOTXT_DEFAULT_ACTION=ls` in `todo.cfg`) or <kbd>t</kbd> <kbd>Space</kbd> to begin entering a `todo.sh` command:

        #!fish
        abbr t todo.sh

2. I add the number of uncompleted tasks in my `todo.txt` file to my fish shell prompt. Here's the relevant bit of fish script from my `fish_prompt.fish` file:

        #!fish
        set todo_txt_file ~/Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.txt
        if test -e $todo_txt_file
          set num_tasks (grep . $todo_txt_file | grep --count --invert-match '^x ')
          if test $num_tasks -gt 0
            set_color --bold yellow
            printf "{%s} " $num_tasks
            set_color normal
          end
        end

    This adds an `{n}` to my prompt where `n` is the number of uncompleted tasks in my `todo.txt` file. If there are no uncompleted tasks it doesn't add anything to my prompt.

Vim integration
---------------

I put this in my `vimrc` file to bind <kbd>&lt;leader&gt;</kbd> <kbd>t</kbd> to open my `todo.txt` file from within vim:

```vimrc
nnoremap <leader>t :e ~/Dropbox/TODO.txt/todo.txt<Enter>
```

There's also a couple of todo.txt plugins for vim but they look like they do a lot more than I'd want: lots of keybindings for editing tasks, sorting, etc. Maybe I'll make a simple vim plugin one day that just does todo.txt syntax highlighting.

